(AOL Autos) -- Ah, that new car smell, that eau de car-logne; it does an ego good while it does a wallet bad.

And now it turns out, it can do bad things to your health, too.

Air freshners can contain aldehydes, esters and ketones, industry spokesman says.

All these years, while we were being offered safety first, last and front, side and rear ways, hardly anyone in the vehicle industry had given much thought to what actually was in that perfume de profit, the new car smell that car buyers sought and bought.

As everyone knew, pollution related to vehicles originated from the exhaust pipe, not the shifter knob.

It was spewed out the back of the rear, not the back of the rear view mirror.

Well, what everyone thought they knew was wrong.

It turns out -- take a deep breath -- that most of that new car smell is not some carefully-compounded, luxury, feel-good incense to the Mammon gods.

But the new car smell comes from toxic gases.

Not only that, but like a two dollar cologne, the effects can linger and linger for years, stinking up not only your shiny new car, but the reputation of the entire vehicle industry itself.

AOL Autos: Best new small cars Who says so?

Just about everyone in the vehicle business these days.

But the initiator was The Ecology Center (EC), a membership-based, nonprofit environmental organization based in Ann Arbor, Michigan.

AOL Autos: 10 most fuel-efficient new cars In a 2006 industry-awakening report entitled "Toxic At Any Speed: Chemicals in Cars and the Need for Safe Alternatives", this independent green organization declared that much of the material in most car interiors that produce that new car smell is made with toxic chemicals known to pose major public health risks.

The report went on to say that not only are vehicle drivers and passengers breathing toxic air, but are also in constant physical contact with dangerous chemicals leaching from just about every interior surface of a new vehicle.

The report says these chemicals give off gases that not only contaminate the air, but also coat interior surfaces with toxic "fog," generally seen as that new car film common to new car interior windshields and windows.

These are the same type of chemicals that are, "linked to birth defects, impaired learning, liver toxicity, premature births and early puberty in laboratory animals amongst other serious health problems," according to EC.

Fake is probably as bad as real.

The companies that market those "new car smell" products that are sold at car washes and auto accessories stores generally will not reveal product contents.

One fragrance industry spokesman indicated they can contain artificial leather odor, plus aldehydes, esters and ketones, which are all organic or chemical compounds.

AOL Autos: Safest cars under $30,000 Back to real.

We are not speaking of plastic doodads here.

There is an average of 250 pounds of plastic in new cars, the largest portion used for interior seat cushions, arm rests, door panels, steering wheels, dashboards, wire insulation and the plethora of aircraft-type knobs and switch controls throughout a car's cockpit.

AOL Autos: 10 least expensive new cars In addition to acettonitrile, decanol, formaldehyde, naphthalene and carbon disulfide used in foams, adhesives and fabrics, the two major problem chemicals in most new vehicles are (a) the PBDEs, which are used as fire retardants throughout the industry and (b) phthalates, which are widely employed to soften PVC plastics.

AOL Autos: Best financing deals of the month Extended research by the Ecology Center covered samples from model years 2000 to 2005 made by 11 manufacturers.

Part of the research showed significantly higher levels of PBDEs in those vehicles as compared to those levels in homes and offices that had been measured in previous studies, making in-car pollution a major source of indoor air pollution and health danger.

In the resultant table of contamination levels, Hyundai rated lowest and Mercedes highest in PBDEs.

Volvo rated lowest and Hyundai highest in phthalates