(AOL Autos)  -- At the 2009 Detroit Auto Show, Chrysler, Mercedes-Benz, Toyota and MINI showed the world what electric vehicles of the future will look like.

And the future of driving looks fun.

The Dodge Circuit EV can blast from 0-to-60 mph in around 4 seconds.

Those in the know realize that sometime in the future, the vast majority of light cars and trucks in the US will feature electric final drive systems.

The motors used in these systems will be powered by batteries, fuel cells, on-board generators, and perhaps even the sun.

But this open issue doesn't change the inevitability of this reality.

Given our current economic times, reality demands practical, tangible, and achievable ideas of what electric vehicles (or "EVs" for short) might actually look like.

This is it ... Chrysler Three of the four electric vehicles Chrysler showed in Detroit, Michigan, were shown at other events and even to Washington bureaucrats.

Each of these vehicles is a running prototype, not some pie-in-the-sky-we'll-never-build that idea.

ENVI is the special group of engineers at Chrysler that develops the company's EVs.

To date, the ENVI group has developed four electrically powered models, each quite different from the other: a Dodge Circuit EV sports car (rear-wheel drive), a Chrysler Town & Country minivan (front-wheel-drive), a Jeep Wrangler Unlimited (all-wheel-drive), and now a Jeep Patriot (front-wheel-drive).

Chrysler promises to offer at least one of these models in 2010, and three more by 2013.

AOL Autos: Dodge Circuit EV photos Chrysler approaches electric vehicles with simple plug-and-play engineering.

Every one of their vehicles uses similar electric drive motors (only varying in power output), advanced lithium-ion batteries, and a power management controller.

Each plugs in to 110- or 220-volt household outlets for recharging.

The Chrysler and both Jeeps use an on-board range-extending battery charger (a generator).

This generator automatically turns on after the vehicle's initial batter charge has been spent (usually within a range of 40 miles), supplying extra voltage that give these three vehicles an estimated range of approximately 400 miles.

The generator is powered by a small gasoline-powered engine that runs with exceptional efficiency.

This technology is similar in concept to what General Motors has shown in their Chevrolet Volt, a vehicle that should be ready for production in 2010.

AOL Autos: Cadillac Converj photos The Dodge Circuit carries a larger battery pack and no generator, so its range on the charge it carries is approximately 150-200 miles.

Its large battery pack combined with compact dimensions and the exceptional torque provided by its electric motor blast the car from zero-to-sixty mph in around four seconds, exceptionally fast for any sports car regardless of engine type.

Mercedes-Benz Mercedes-Benz used the 2009 Detroit Auto Show to showcase their Concept BlueZERO vehicles.

The Mercedes approach was to develop one efficient body style, and then equip it with three different electric drive packages.

AOL Autos: Mercedes Stirling Moss photos Much of the hardware for the all-electric front-wheel-drive propulsion units is built into what Mercedes calls "sandwich-floor" architecture that the company uses on several production cars.

The design helps keep heavy components mounted low on the chassis for better handling, enhanced safety, and maximized interior room.

All three Concept BlueZERO vehicles include electric drive and batteries.

The E-Cell uses a large battery pack that is said to deliver a range of 120 miles.

The F-Cell utilizes a smaller battery pack, but supplements the vehicle's range with a hydrogen fuel cell.

The fuel cell produces electricity to recharge the battery pack that extends cruising range to 240 miles.

The E-Cell Plus, with a range of approximately 360 miles, is the distance champion.

The key is the on-board generator powered by tiny 1-liter turbo-charged three-cylinder gasoline engine.